source/install.rst, before:

============
Installation
============

We recommend installing prestans via `PyPI <http://pypi.python.org/pypi>`_::

    $ sudo pip install prestans

this will build and install prestans for your default Python interpreter. To keep up-to-date; use the ``---upgrade`` option::

	$ sudo pip install prestans --upgrade

Alternatively you can download and build prestans using distutils::

    $ tar -zxvf prestans-2.0.tgz
    $ cd prestans-2.0
    $ sudo python setup.py install

Environments like Google's AppEngine require you to include custom packages as part of your source. Things to consider when distributing prestans with your application:

* Make sure you target a particular release of prestans, distributing our development branch is not recommended (unless of course you require a bleeding edge feature). 
* If you prefer to include prestans as a Git submodule, ensure you use reference one of the ``tags``.
* If your server environment has hard limits on number of files, consider using `zipimport <http://docs.python.org/2/library/zipimport.html>`_.

As a `Git submodule <http://git-scm.com/book/en/Git-Tools-Submodules>`_::

	$ git submodule add https://github.com/prestans/prestans.git prestans

Make sure you read on about configuring your Web server environment.

Software Requirements
=====================

The server side requires a WSGI compliant environment:

* Python 2.7
* WSGI compliant server environment (`Apache <http://httpd.apache.org>`_ + `mod_wsgi <http://modwsgi.googlecode.com>`_, or `Google AppEngine <https://developers.google.com/appengine/>`_, etc).
* WebOb 1.2.3 (should be installed as a dependency, AppEngine already provided WebOb)
* You may optionally need SQLAlchemy or AppEngine.

Client side code is dependant on the Google Closure tools.

We mostly test on latest releases of `Ubuntu Server <http://www.ubuntu.com/download/server>`_, and Google's `AppEngine <https://developers.google.com/appengine/>`_.

Starting your project
=====================

For deployment under Apache
---------------------------

Directory stucture::

	+-- app
	+-- conf
	+-- static
	+-- ext
	    +-- prestans
	+-- client
	+-- conf

`mod_wsgi <http://code.google.com/p/modwsgi/wiki/ConfigurationDirectives#WSGIPythonPath>`_

For deployment under AppEngine
------------------------------


Development Server
==================


* `werkzeug <http://werkzeug.pocoo.org/>`_ - built on top of Pocoo's web server.
* `blessings <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/blessings/>`_ - A thin, practical wrapper around terminal coloring, styling, and positioning.
* `voluptuous <https://github.com/alecthomas/voluptuous>`_ - Voluptuous, despite the name, is a Python data validation library. It is primarily intended for validating data coming into Python as JSON, YAML, etc.

Commit message:

Adds providers, ext to source control; updated issues tracker link for 2.x onwards

source/install.rst, after:

============
Installation
============

We recommend installing prestans via `PyPI <http://pypi.python.org/pypi>`_::

    $ sudo pip install prestans

this will build and install prestans for your default Python interpreter. To keep up-to-date; use the ``---upgrade`` option::

	$ sudo pip install prestans --upgrade

Alternatively you can download and build prestans using distutils::

    $ tar -zxvf prestans-2.0.tgz
    $ cd prestans-2.0
    $ sudo python setup.py install

Environments like Google's AppEngine require you to include custom packages as part of your source. Things to consider when distributing prestans with your application:

* Make sure you target a particular release of prestans, distributing our development branch is not recommended (unless of course you require a bleeding edge feature). 
* If you prefer to include prestans as a Git submodule, ensure you use reference one of the ``tags``.
* If your server environment has hard limits on number of files, consider using `zipimport <http://docs.python.org/2/library/zipimport.html>`_.

As a `Git submodule <http://git-scm.com/book/en/Git-Tools-Submodules>`_::

	$ git submodule add https://github.com/prestans/prestans.git prestans

Make sure you read on about configuring your Web server environment.

Software Requirements
=====================

The server side requires a WSGI compliant environment:

* Python 2.7
* WSGI compliant server environment (`Apache <http://httpd.apache.org>`_ + `mod_wsgi <http://modwsgi.googlecode.com>`_, or `Google AppEngine <https://developers.google.com/appengine/>`_, etc).
* WebOb 1.2.3 (should be installed as a dependency, AppEngine already provided WebOb)
* You may optionally need SQLAlchemy or AppEngine.

Client side code is dependant on the Google Closure tools.

We mostly test on latest releases of `Ubuntu Server <http://www.ubuntu.com/download/server>`_, and Google's `AppEngine <https://developers.google.com/appengine/>`_.

Starting your project
=====================

For deployment under Apache
---------------------------

Directory stucture::

	+-- app
	+-- conf
	+-- static
	+-- ext
	    +-- prestans
	+-- client
	+-- conf

`mod_wsgi <http://code.google.com/p/modwsgi/wiki/ConfigurationDirectives#WSGIPythonPath>`_

For deployment under AppEngine
------------------------------

Python projects under AppEngine use a YAML configuration file called `app.yaml <https://developers.google.com/appengine/docs/python/config/appconfig>`_ to specify versions of Python libraries you project requires. Ensure that you have one of the following included in your `app.yaml <https://developers.google.com/appengine/docs/python/config/appconfig#Python_app_yaml_Configuring_libraries>`_ file.

During development::

    libraries:
    - name: webob
      version: latest

During deployment::

    libraries:
    - name: webob
      version: "1.2.3"


Leaving this directive out loads version 1.1 of WebOb; prestans 2.0 onwards specifically uses WebOb 1.2.3+.

Development Server
==================


* `werkzeug <http://werkzeug.pocoo.org/>`_ - built on top of Pocoo's web server.
* `blessings <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/blessings/>`_ - A thin, practical wrapper around terminal coloring, styling, and positioning.
* `voluptuous <https://github.com/alecthomas/voluptuous>`_ - Voluptuous, despite the name, is a Python data validation library. It is primarily intended for validating data coming into Python as JSON, YAML, etc.
